Alright, so here's the general setup
that explains what we're doing here.
We're going to look not at this particular
equation but at a more general equation which
is just like it: x squared plus bx equals
c. So there's more letters now. There's the
letter x which represents our mystery unknown
number, and now there's letters b and c which
are not representing mystery numbers anymore;
they're representing constant given numbers.
It's just that we're not specific about which ones
they are. So here and here, b was 10 and c was 39,
but we want to explain the algorithm in a way that
doesn't depend on which particular numbers we're
using, so we use b and c. Okay, but these b and
c letters are playing a different role from x.
We imagine that b and c are known
to us and we have to solve for x.
So what do we do? Well, we mimic what we did up
here. We add b over 2 squared to both sides—that's
the little square that we're adding there—and now
what's on the left-hand side is a perfect square.
Just like this here is a perfect square.
It is equal to x plus b over 2 all squared,
and let's check that. If we square this,
we get x squared plus 2 times the product
2 times x times b over 2—that's exactly bx—and
b over 2 squared, well, there it is right there.
And this thing here, we can just
write it as c plus b squared over 4.
Now in this form, it's much like this equation
here. We take x plus b over 2 squared equals this,
so x plus b over 2 will be the square root of this
where we're introducing a new terminology—the idea
of a square root, a number whose square is this.
So we end up getting x equals the square root of
c plus b squared over 4 minus b over 2 because
the b over 2 comes around to the other side.
We're introducing this third notation for the
square root; that was an innovation also due
to the Arabs. So for example, the square root of
16 is 4, the square root of 25 is 5, and so on.
Alright, let's have a look at this example
which mimics exactly what we're doing here
but rewritten in a more modern form that's
familiar to all students of algebra. So here
is the modern way of rewriting what Al-Khwarizmi
did in that previous example. Usually, today,
we think about a quadratic equation in this form:
ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero, where a,
b, and c are three specific given numbers, and x
is an unknown number that we're trying to find.
We'll assume that this coefficient a is
non-zero so we really have a quadratic equation.
Now there's a step-by-step procedure to
transform this equation into an equation for x,
and this is a well-known formula that all students
learn. How to get that solution is almost as
important; perhaps maybe it's more important
than the solution itself. So it's something
that all serious students of mathematics should
know—the various steps to go from here to here.
So what do we do? The first thing is we take the
a and we take it as a factor: a times x squared
plus b over a times x, and we bring the c
to the other side, giving us minus c there.
We divide by a, so this a comes over to the other
side as minus c over a, and what's inside here.
Now we complete the square in exactly the
same way as we did on the previous slide.
We do that by adding the square
of half of this coefficient
b over 2a, so we add the square of that to both
sides, so that it is still a valid equation.
That makes what's on the left-hand side here a
perfect square: (x plus b over 2a) all squared.
When we simplify what's on the right,
the common denominator is 4a squared,
and there will be a b squared from here. When we
take this over a common denominator of 4a squared,
we have to multiply the top by 4a, giving us
b squared minus 4ac in the numerator here.
So this squared equals this quantity, so what's
inside is the square root of the right-hand side.
We put the square root of the numerator and the
square root of the denominator, which will be 2a.
Because the square root has an ambiguity
in terms of sign, if we have one solution,
the negative of it is also a solution. We put
a plus or minus here, telling us that we can
either take plus this or minus this. The square
root is by convention always a positive number,
so when we talk about the square root
of 9, we always mean 3, not minus 3.
To go from here to here, it's simply a question
of taking this b over 2a and bringing it to the
other side. So finally, x equals minus b plus
or minus the square root of b squared minus
4ac all over 2a. This is a well-known formula
for all students, and in our context, we can
actually use this as long as this condition
is satisfied: that what's inside here, this b
squared minus 4ac term, had better be a square
because we want to take the square root of it.
So in particular, it's going to be positive; it's
got to be positive and it's got to be a square
because right now we're still working in
the realm entirely of rational numbers.
Okay, so that's good. That's the classic
formula for the quadratic equation.
Next time, we're going to talk about an
important ingredient to this business, which
is: how do you actually find a square root?
We've been assuming that you can kind of do it,
but how do you actually find the square root of a
number? That's a very interesting algorithm which
we'll discuss next time. I hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.